I decided I'd have a look at [Django][1] to get a feel for a different web
framework and to learn more about Python itself. Its no secret that I've been
really interested in IronPython recently and I'm excited to give Python a go
without the backing of the .NET framework (but with a complete standard
library implementation, unlike IronPython).

For this post I basically just followed the installation guide and the first 4
tutorials in the excellent [Django Documentation][2]. Its not my intention to
reproduce the tutorials in this post, I really just want to discuss things I
found interesting while learning the framework.

### Installing

After some fooling around I found the following versions of Python, Django and
MySql were the easiest way to get started using Django on my Vista box. All of
the versions below have windows installers so its pretty straight forward.

[Python 2.5.4][3] (MySQL Python didn't have an installer for 2.6)

[Django 1.0.2][4]

[MySql 5.0][5] (I had problems installing 5.1 on my Vista Box, so I reverted
to 5.0 which just worked)

[MySql Python Module][6]

I deliberately didn't install the [GUI tools for MySql][7] as I wanted to get
hardcore from the console. Djangos ORM can be used directly from the Python
console and MySql has a complete command line interface.

### Getting Started

Django comes with a helper script to assist setting up and managing a site. To
do things like create a new web project all you need to do is run following
command:

    #!/use/bin/bash
    python django-admin.py startproject [sitename]

This creates the skeleton project structure and files.

    #!/use/bin/bash
    .
    ..
    manage.py
    settings.py
    urls.py
    __init__.py

You can immediately validate everything is on the right track by running the
development server.

    #!/use/bin/bash
    python manage.py runserver

I was pretty excited I could just create a new database from the same console
window
    
    #!/use/bin/bash
    c:\Working>mysql -u root -p
    Enter password: *******
    Welcome to the MySQL monitor.  Commands end with ; or \g.
    Your MySQL connection id is 2
    Server version: 5.0.77-community-nt MySQL Community Edition (GPL)
    Type 'help;' or '\h' for help. Type '\c' to clear the buffer.

    mysql> CREATE DATABASE demodb;
    Query OK, 1 row affected (0.03 sec)

All I then needed to do was add my database credentials to the settings.py.
Once this was setup I could use the syncdb command to build all the tables
required by the framework (which includes an authorization module).
    
    #!/use/bin/bash
    python manage.py syncdb

Which, without me doing anything else, creates the tables.

    #!/use/bin/bash
    Creating table auth_permission
    Creating table auth_group
    Creating table auth_user
    Creating table auth_message
    Creating table django_content_type
    Creating table django_session
    Creating table django_site


### Models

As with most MVC web application frameworks, there is a standard project
structure convention. Django offers another command to quickly create an app,
which is basically a small web application.


    #!/use/bin/bash
    python manage.py startapp weblog


This creates a sub folder with the following files empty files


    #!/use/bin/bash
    __init__.py
    models.py
    views.py


Then custom models can be added to the models python file. (Yes, I see that we
probably would want more characters for a post, but I just want to get
something going for now)


    #!/use/bin/python
    class Post(models.Model):
        content = models.CharField(max_length=200)
        pub_date = models.DateTimeField('date published')
        class Comment(models.Model):
        post = models.ForeignKey(Post)
        comment = models.CharField(max_length=200)


To make the next bit of magic happen, we have to register this class in the
main settings python file of this project.


    #!/use/bin/python
    INSTALLED_APPS = (
        'django.contrib.auth',
        'django.contrib.contenttypes',
        'django.contrib.sessions',
        'django.contrib.sites',
        'DjangoSite.weblog',
    )


Now the syncdb command can be used again to create the new tables for our
model.


    #!/use/bin/bash
    c:\Working\DjangoSite\DjangoSite>python manage.py syncdb
    Creating table weblog_post
    Creating table weblog_comment
    Installing index for weblog.Comment model

We can now start checking out the ORM provided by Django in the interactive
Python console.

    #!/use/bin/bash
    >>> from DjangoSite.weblog.models import *
    >>> import datetime
    >>>
    >>> post = Post(content = "Django Rocks!", pub_date=datetime.datetime.now())
    >>> post.save()
    >>>
    >>> comment = Comment(post = post, comment="+1")
    >>> comment.save()
    >>>
    >>> findPost = Post.objects.get(id=post.id)
    >>> findPost.content
    u'Django Rocks!'
    >>>
    >>> comments = findPost.comment_set.all()
    >>> for c in comments:
    ...     print c.comment
    ...
    >>> findPost.delete()


That's pretty cool, and just 6 lines of code to create the models!

### Administration

A few lines need to be uncommented in the urls python file, another line added
to the installed apps list and the new table needs to added to the database to
enable the default administration features. For the mean time this will serve
pages to manage user accounts, later we'll be able to use the administration
features to create and a web administration interface for any of our models.

The urlpatterns object is pretty cool. Its basically the URL routing and it
uses regular expressions to map requests to handler scripts. More on this
before this post is finished.


    #!/use/bin/python
    from django.conf.urls.defaults import *
    
    # Uncomment the next two lines to enable the admin:
    from django.contrib import admin

    admin.autodiscover()

    urlpatterns = patterns('',
        (r'^admin/(.*)', admin.site.root) ,
    )



Now if we run the server admin pages can be found from /admin directory of the
site.

I won't go into to much detail about how its done but by simply registering a
model, web pages are provided to manage that model (finding, adding, deleting
and updating). Its all very clever, the framework does lots of introspection
to display the correct html controls for each field type.

To separate the UI from the model, a class can be created which is used to
guide how the admin framework renders the pages for the model, it is then used
to map fields to properties on the model object.

### Views

Getting some weblog pages setup is amazingly straight forward. Its just a
matter of adding a regular expression into the urlpatterns that matches the
type of URL you want to handle and a function to handle it. The most basic
handler method is what you'd expect, it takes a http request and returns a
http response.

    #!/use/bin/python
    from django.http import HttpResponse
    
    def index(request):
        return HttpResponse("This is the posts page!")


This can be expanded to actually use the weblog models. The code below gets
the 5 most recent posts and creates a string with each post content separated
with a <br /> tag.


    #!/use/bin/python
    from DjangoSite.weblog.models import Post, Comment
    from django.http import HttpResponse

    def index(request):
        lastestPosts = Post.objects.all().order_by('-pub_date')[:5]
        output = '<br />'.join([p.content for p in lastestPosts])
        return HttpResponse(output)


Well that's pretty cool, but I don't think we'll be writing entire pages using
standard Python. Besides, these look more like controllers than views, there
must be more to it.

### Templates

With templates, we can throw objects at a template to be rendered. The index
method can now be separated from the rendering of HTML

    #!/use/bin/python
    from django.shortcuts import render_to_response
    from DjangoSite.weblog.models import Post, Comment
    from django.http import HttpResponse

    def index(request):
        latestPosts = Post.objects.all().order_by('-pub_date')[:5]
        return render_to_response('weblog/index.html', {'posts': latestPosts})


And the template (weblog/index.html) looks something like this

    #!/use/bin/html
    {% if posts %}
    <ul>
    {% for post in posts %}
    <li>{{ post.content }}</li>
    {% endfor %}
    </ul>
    {% else %}
    <p>There are no posts</p>
    {% endif %}


It worth noting this isn't just Python embedded in HTML. I think this text
from the Django documentation describes this design decision:

> ..you'll want to bear in mind that the Django template system is not simply
Python embedded into HTML. This is by design: the template system is meant to
express presentation, not program logic

It makes sense to me.

### Forms

A forms post data can be retrieved from a dictionary on the request object.

    #!/use/bin/python
    def index(request):
        postTitle = resquest.POST["postTitle"]
        ...


I'm sure Django has support for mapping posts to model objects, but I haven't
seen it yet.

### Some more magic

It turns out there is heaps more support in Django for handling generic web
problems. For example creating list and details pages is so common that Django
has some generic functionality to help. You just need to provide a model and
write some templates to describe how to render the models.

It appears there is heaps more of the magic throughout the framework some
things I haven't yet looked into are:

* Advanced form processing
* Using the RSS framework
* Using the cache framework
* Using the comments framework

### Summary

I've just stepped through all the basic steps to building a functional
database driven web application. Overall I'm pretty impressed; it didn't take
much time, code or leaps in faith to get it going. It appears to do generic
things, like what I was doing, is even easier as the framework has generic
support for it.

I am glad I got into it from the ground up, I think I would have been a lot
more skeptical had I written a simple weblog without writing a line of Python.
I've come to learn that its not about the 90% things that are easy to do in a
web application framework, its about the 10% of things you want to do but
don't work out of the box. Of course I haven't had enough exposure with Django
to say how deep the application framework actually goes. I personally feel
that Django and Python are a fantastic language and framework to deal with the
10% of requirements that don't come out of the box.

On anther note, I personally love coding from the console rather than an IDE,
even with limited exposure I was getting pretty quick navigating my project,
running the Django web development helpers and managing MySql. I personally
think it's faster developing from a console with all your tools accessible
without taking your hands of the keyboard.

Its been lots of fun playing with the framework. I'd definitely like to build
a site in Django some time, but I'm not sure when I'll find the time.

   [1]: http://www.djangoproject.com/
   [2]: http://docs.djangoproject.com/en/dev/
   [3]: http://www.python.org/download/releases/2.5.4/
   [4]: http://www.djangoproject.com/download/
   [5]: http://dev.mysql.com/downloads/mysql/5.0.html
   [6]: http://sourceforge.net/projects/mysql-python
   [7]: http://dev.mysql.com/downloads/gui-tools/5.0.html

