I'm not in anyway formally associated Microsoft other than
that I've been primarily using their tools to develop software for the over
the last few years, so I was a little excited I was invited to Liberation Day
in Sydney after placing 2nd in DevSta. I thought it would be great to see
Steve Ballmer, infamous for this [famous clip][3] and [this][4]. He is, of
course, also the Microsoft CEO and was going to announce Azure the new
Microsoft cloud computing platform. He was sure to be entertaining anyway.

As I'd never been to Sydney I decided I could spend a couple of days on Bondi
Beach with my girlfriend and drop into the conference and while I was there.
I'm expecting to be looking for a new job from next year, probably not in
Sydney, but I thought it would also be good to see who was there and meet a
few people anyway. I was expecting there would be a couple of DevSta judges
there too.

There were heaps of people at the event, I wouldn't be surprised if there
actually was the 1000 developers the flyer claimed there would be. It was
cool, I can't image an event with that many developers in Melbourne. It was
streamed live and can be replayed on the [Power To Developers][5] site. I
watched Steve get up and do his thing, and it was fun, not rock'n'roll, but
fun. Unfortunately I wasn't feeling very well, almost feverish, and I had to
duck out to find a chemist.

Gianpaolo Carraro's presentation attempted to demonstrate how easy developing
cloud solutions for the Azure was with Visual Studios 2008. I thought it was
pretty cool despite most of his demos failing in ways he couldn't have
imagined. The Azure platform sounded pretty awesome, basically allowing custom
.Net assemblies to be uploaded and invoked on Microsoft servers. He also
managed to successfully demonstrate the cloud emulator for locally running and
debugging cloud applications. I also really like the idea of being able to a
write LINQ query joining two data tables from a SQL Server Service in the
cloud.

[Mike Culver][6] presented the [Amazon Web Services][7] cloud solutions to the
Vic.NET user group about a year ago and I think he sold their technology and
the possibilities better. He showed the architecture of a video compression
service that used a message queue service to queue requests and a controller
application that can automatically rent, build and deploy servers capable of
processing the requests. I thought it was pretty cool. I think Microsoft are a
long way behind, but we'll see what the software giant is capable of. I'm
certainly keen to get in and give it a go.

I still wasn't feeling well and missed most of Tim Sneath which was a shame,
Brodie had seen him in London years ago but said he "knew his stuff". At the
networking drinks I chatted with [Michael Kordahi][8] which was kind of fun,
he'd judged my entry and he is a Silverlight guy. He introduced me to a couple
of people, one of which was [Jeremi Kelaher][9] who does [Strange Devices
Podcasts][10]. I also ran into [Tatham Oddie][11] on the way out who I'd seen
present MVC stuff at REMIX and Vic.NET. I would have liked to have chatted
with Andrew Coates who is a great presenter and was also a DevSta judge, but I
didn't end up seeing him this time.


   [2]: /image.axd?picture=WindowsLiveWriter/LiberationDayPowerToDevelopers_141ED/image_2.png

   [3]: http://au.youtube.com/watch?v=8To-6VIJZRE&feature=related

   [4]: http://au.youtube.com/watch?v=wvsboPUjrGc&NR=1

   [5]: http://www.microsoft.com/australia/powertodevelopers/live_rally.aspx

   [6]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/pdp/profile/A2D5YJLCHYWN9Q

   [7]: http://aws.amazon.com/

   [8]: http://delicategeniusblog.com/

   [9]: http://togetheronline.com.au

   [10]: http://strangedevices.wordpress.com/

   [11]: http://blog.tatham.oddie.com.au/
