For me it's been another busy fun-filled intense year with the usual ups and
downs.  I've been amazed and fascinated this year with the amount of "new
stuff" coming out from all directions, which has seen me cast my information
gathering net deep into the web.  The result being that I've developed a good
case of information addiction, which I will have to tame in order to get
anything done ;-)

In particular from Microsoft I've learnt a fair bit this year about
Silverlight, WCF, AJAX, MVC but still have a very long todo list ... including
Azure, Mesh, Entity Framework, MEF, Surface, Workflow ... and more. I feel
that it is a great time to be a software developer with so much to play with
and the future looking so promising.

Also this year I stepped up my reading about the "Singularity" which has kept
me very entertained - so much so that it's been a while since I've read a
scifi novel (except for Ian Bank's - Matter, which was awesome) since reading
about what is going on out there is kind of mind blowing. To hear Intel's CTO
Justin Rattner say that the singularity will be achieved by 2049 is
extraordinary.  Most conversations I've had with people about the singularity
have been met with confused looks - almost "are you out of your mind" type
looks - which made me realize that most people aren't really thinking much
about the future, or not the distant future 10+ years - maybe people are just
struggling to keep up with progress?

I think that next year that the idea of the singularity will gather a bit more
momentum and perhaps get into the mainstream - although that may not be such a
good thing ;-)


Anyways here are some of my favorites for the year...


### Videos that blew my mind in 2008 (still!)

  * [Building Gods][1]
  * [Human 2.0][2]
  * [Accelerating change][3]
  * [Next 5000 days of the web][4]
  * [Flow][5]
  * [Paintball auto targeting][6]
  * [Darpa dog][7]
  * [Darpa Exoskeleton][8]
  * [PDC 2008 videos][9]
  * most stuff from the [human network][10]

### Technology/ideas that blew my mind (at the time anyways)

  * [photosynth][11]
  * [google maps streetview][12]
  * [twitter][13]
  * cloud services - [mesh][14]  , windows azure, [amazon][15]
  * [stackoverflow][16]

### Favorite twitter peps

  * [@rands][17]
  * [@timoreilly][18]
  * [@elijahmanor][19]
  * [@SilverlightNews][20]
  * [@darthvader][21]

### Favorite bloggers

  * [Coding Horror][22]
  * [Rands in Response][23]
  * [Scott Hanselman's ComputerZen.com][24]
  * [ScotGu's Blog][25]
  * [Rob Conery][26]
  * [Jonas Follesoe][27]
  * [Reflective Perspective][28]
  * [Arjan`s World][29]
  * [xkcd][30]
  * [BrainStuff][31]

### Favorite podcasts

  * [stackoverflow][32]
  * [hanselminutes][33]
  * [Herding Code][34]
  * [Alt.NET][35]
  * [Channel9 MSDN][36]
  * [Dimecasts][37]


Have a happy new year in 2009!


   [1]: http://video.google.com/videoplay?docid=1079797626827646234&q=building+gods

   [2]: http://femagazine.net/node/155

   [3]: http://singularityhub.com/2008/11/28/did-you-know-30-accelerating-change-video-released/

   [4]: http://singularityhub.com/2008/12/27/kevin-kelly-predicting-the-next-5000-days-of-the-web/

   [5]: http://www.ted.com/index.php/talks/mihaly_csikszentmihalyi_on_flow.html

   [6]: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RxBa5bQfTGc

   [7]: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4oMTKuzc__M

   [8]: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SFXEFPco8l8

   [9]: https://sessions.microsoftpdc.com/

   [10]: http://blog.futurestreetconsulting.com/

   [11]: http://livelabs.com/photosynth/

   [12]: http://maps.google.com/

   [13]: http://twitter.com/

   [14]: https://www.mesh.com/

   [15]: http://aws.amazon.com/

   [16]: http://stackoverflow.com

   [17]: http://twitter.com/rands

   [18]: http://twitter.com/timoreilly

   [19]: http://twitter.com/elijahmanor

   [20]: http://twitter.com/SilverlightNews

   [21]: http://twitter.com/darthvader

   [22]: http://www.codinghorror.com/

   [23]: http://www.randsinrepose.com/

   [24]: http://www.hanselman.com/

   [25]: http://weblogs.asp.net/scottgu/

   [26]: http://blog.wekeroad.com/blog/

   [27]: http://jonas.follesoe.no/

   [28]: http://blog.cwa.me.uk/

   [29]: http://www.arjansworld.com

   [30]: http://xkcd.com/

   [31]: http://brainstuff.howstuffworks.com/

   [32]: http://blog.stackoverflow.com/

   [33]: http://www.hanselminutes.com/

   [34]: http://herdingcode.com/

   [35]: http://altnetpodcast.com/

   [36]: http://channel9.msdn.com/

   [37]: http://www.dimecasts.net/

