One of my favourite books on web development is [High Performance Web Sites:
Essential Knowledge for Front-End Engineers][1] by [Steve Souders][2]. From
the authors role as Chief Performance Yahoo! he describes 14 surprisingly
simple rules for improving front end performance of web sites. Most
professional web developers should know most of the best practices, but might
also pick up a tip or two. The rules are justified with quantifiable test
results, which is great when you're trying to convince a manager its worth
while implementing front end improvements.

There also is 34 categorized [rules][3] for best practice on the Yahoo! web
site. Yahoo! provides [YSlow][4] a plug-in for Firefox which analyses pages
and explains rules that would improve front end performance.

This post is about implementing rule 10, Minify JavaScript. I have known about
minifying Javascript for a long time but had never implemented it, today I
decided to give it a go on a site I run. I had a look at a few minifying
tools:

[JSMin][5] - Created by Douglas Crockford, JSMin is the most basic of the
minifying tools I've seen out there. It has been ported to .Net, but its not
really a very sophisticated tool. It removes line breaks, white space and
doesn't do any variable renaming. There is a [site][6] that you can paste some
JavaScript in a compress it with JSMin or Packer to have a look at the output.

[Packer][7] - Created by Dean Edwards, Packer uses a different approach to
minifying JavaScript. Packer compresses the code into an expression that can
be evaluated to its original form by the [Javascript eval][8] function. I
think this is cool and I'm not influenced by people out there saying you
should never use the eval function. Packer is used and the eval function has
been around since Javascript 1.0, it will be supported by modern browsers I'm
supporting. The two main criticisms of Packer I am a little concerned about
are;  There is a delay after the script is received by the browser before it
evaluates to your actual Javascript code. With that in mind, unless you design
the page well, you may intermittently cause Javascript errors by referencing
code that doesn't yet exist. The second criticism that while packers
compression is very good, it doesn't compress much more when gziped before
being sent to the browser. Packer has been ported to .Net, Perl and PHP.

[YUI Compressor][9] - Created by Yahoo!, this is what I wanted in a minifying
tool. It removes all unnecessary characters and does variable renaming. The
YUI Compressor is implemented in Java, there is an [open source project][10]
on [CodePlex][11] to port it to .Net but at the time or writing this, it has
only ported the CSS compression algorithm. [Julien Lecomte][12] an architect
at Yahoo talks about the YUI Compressors performance in his [blog][13].

[Dojo ShrinkSafe][14] - Create by the Dojo people, it seems to be doing the
same thing as the YUI Compressor. I didn't look very hard, but I didn't find a
.Net port for this one either.

There is also [Minify][15] a PHP library on [Google Code][16] for creating
servers that can combine and minify script files on the fly before they are
sent to the browser. The project I'm working on is hosted by IIS and S3 so I
didn't look into this any further.

I decided to try the Yahoo YUI Compressor and Dojo ShrinkSafe even though
there was no .Net port for either. JSMin didn't provide the compression I
wanted to make it worth while. I outlined some of my concerns about Packer,
and I decided I would just prefer plain compacted Javascript.

Then the was the question of whether its ok to use a Java application in my
.Net build process? Java is a free and widely used platform, and in this case
the best tools for are built on it. I have the JRE on all the computers I use
anyway, so for me its no problem. If you need to compress scripts at runtime
in .Net it may be worth looking a bit further into other .Net solutions and
ports.

Both the Yahoo! and Dojo compressors were easy to use from the command line:



    java -jar yuicompressor-2.3.5.jar scripts\combined.js -o scripts\yui_compressed.js

    java -jar custom_rhino.jar -c scripts\combined.js > scripts\dojo_compress.js 2>&1


The only thing I had to do to get them working was change the UFT-8 encoding
of some of my script files to ANSI. After that everything on my site worked as
is should with both libraries. If I had any problems I was going to give [JS
Lint][17] a try. It is recommended to use JS Lint to verify your Javascript
before compressing it.

After using a tool to combine my uncompressed script files, the final script
was 16,042 bytes. Below are the result of using ShrinkSafe and YUI Compressor
on that code:


    Dojo ShrinkSafe, 11,543 bytes, 71%

    YUI Compressor, 10,448 bytes, 65%


So what did I discover? I was really happy with both tools, they both
compressed and didn't break my code. Because both can be run from the command
line they should be easy to integrate into my build process, provided my build
and development machines have Java installed.

At this stage I'm not gziping my scripts, but that has more to do with my
applications architecture, the scripts are being served by a storage in the
cloud solution. I may look into providing the correct meta data to statically
host gziped scripts, but that will be the topic for another post.

As for getting it into my build process I just used the post build tasks hook
in Visual Studios. It could just as easily be part of your NAnt script.

I hope this helps the front end performance of your web pages too.


   [1]: http://oreilly.com/catalog/9780596529307/

   [2]: http://www.oreillynet.com/pub/au/2951

   [3]: http://developer.yahoo.com/performance/rules.html

   [4]: http://developer.yahoo.com/yslow/

   [5]: http://www.crockford.com/javascript/jsmin.html

   [6]: http://www.jscompress.com/

   [7]: http://dean.edwards.name/packer/

   [8]: http://www.w3schools.com/jsref/jsref_eval.asp

   [9]: http://developer.yahoo.com/yui/compressor/

   [10]: http://www.codeplex.com/YUICompressor

   [11]: http://www.codeplex.com

   [12]: http://www.julienlecomte.net/blog/author/admin/

   [13]: http://www.julienlecomte.net/blog/2007/08/13/

   [14]: http://dojotoolkit.org/docs/shrinksafe

   [15]: http://code.google.com/p/minify/

   [16]: http://code.google.com/

   [17]: http://www.jslint.com/lint.html

